---
title: Crystal 0.13.0 released!
summary: A bunch of features
thumbnail: +
author: asterite
---

[Crystal 0.13.0](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/releases/tag/0.13.0) has been released!

This release includes some compiler and standard library fixes, as well as a bunch of additions.
Let's see some of them.

### Special handling of case with tuple literals

There's now special language support for matching multiple values. For example, FizzBuzz
can now be written like this, using an underscore (`_`) to match any value:

{% highlight ruby %}
(1..100).each do |i|
  case {i % 3, i % 5}
  when {0, 0}
    puts "FizzBuzz"
  when {0, _}
    puts "Fizz"
  when {_, 0}
    puts "Buzz"
  else
    puts i
  end
end
{% endhighlight ruby %}

With this new syntax you can also match types, and variables inside a `when` body are known
by the compiler to have those types:

{% highlight ruby %}
a = rand < 0.5 ? 1 : "hello"
b = rand < 0.5 ? 2 : "bye"

case {a, b}
when {Int32, Int32}
  puts "Both ints: #{a + 1}, #{b + 1}"
when {String, String}
  puts "Both strings: #{a.upcase}, #{b.upcase}"
else
  puts "Other: #{a}, #{b}"
end
{% endhighlight ruby %}

### Backreferences in sub and gsub

`String#sub` and `String#gsub` now feature a syntax for backreferences, similar to Ruby's.
For example:

{% highlight ruby %}
puts "hello world".gsub(/([aeiou])/, "*\\1*") # => "h*e*ll*o* w*o*rld"
{% endhighlight ruby %}

To implement this, `gsub` does a quick check to see if the string has any backlash in it. If so,
for every match it will scan the string for backreferences. The quick check would make existing
code slower. However, most of the cases the replacement string is known at compile-time, so that
check disappears in release mode, thanks to LLVM.

### Custom separator and quote for CSV

The separator and quote field for parsing CSV can now be specified at construction time,
thanks to [jreinert](https://github.com/jreinert):

{% highlight ruby %}
require "csv"

string = <<-CSV
         name;value
         foo;bar
         CSV
CSV.parse(string, separator: ';') # => [["name", "value"], ["foo", "bar"]]
{% endhighlight ruby %}

### Random float

Now you can generate a random float between 0 and `max`, or between a given float range,
thanks to [AlexWayfer](https://github.com/AlexWayfer):

{% highlight ruby %}
puts rand(1.5) # => 0.0369659
puts rand(1.5..2.5) # => 1.68439
{% endhighlight ruby %}

### Other changes

Be sure to read the full [changelog](https://github.com/crystal-lang/crystal/releases/tag/0.13.0), as there
are more additions, small changes, bug fixes and optimizations.
